Strategic Assessment: Where Eidolon Stands
The empirical record from Phases 1–4 has produced a crisp, falsifiable finding: monocular predictive models (Sapiens) hallucinate generic, plausible human geometry — they do not encode identity-specific biometric micro-curvature. Both volumetric partitions (z_d, z_a) are dead, and the DINO→slider bridge is dead. What survives is:

Filter table

Component

Status

Identity AUC
z_g (pose-invariant geometry from keypoints)	Shipped	0.67–0.69
DINOv3 flesh-masked patch tokens	Shipped	0.797
z_d (monocular depth)	Dead	−0.023 Δ
z_a (monocular normals)	Dead	−0.039 Δ
DINO→slider bridge	Dead	worse than random projection
The conditioning stack is settled: DINO patches (identity) + z_g (interpretable geometry control). That is a working two-stream system, but it is a long way from the original vision of three mathematically firewalled PCA partitions.

The question now: can structured, interpretable, identity-bearing geometric partitions be recovered from images at all — just not from monocular predictive layers?

Four Paths Forward (Ranked by Evidence)
Path A: Ship the DiT With What Works (Lowest Risk)
Build Phase 5 immediately using the proven stack: flesh-masked DINO patch tokens for identity, z_g for interpretable geometry sliders. Block-diagonal ingestion with two streams instead of three.

Evidence for:

Arc2Face (ECCV 2024 Oral, foivospar et al.) demonstrated that ArcFace embeddings alone — a single 512-d vector — condition a Stable Diffusion model to generate ID-consistent faces at high fidelity. This is the dominant paradigm and it works. Eidolon's DINO patches (AUC 0.797) are a stronger identity carrier than ArcFace embeddings on the hegre corpus, and z_g adds interpretable sliders on top.
FaceCrafter (BMVC 2025, Mishima et al.) proved that lightweight IP-Adapter-style modules (11.7M params) can independently control pose, expression, and emotion on top of an identity-conditioned base model, with decoupled cross-attention summation. This is architecturally identical to what Eidolon's DiT would do with z_g sliders.
The block-diagonal ingestion module is already spec'd (§7.1 of architecture.md). The path from here to a training run is short.
Risk: The DiT is undertrained relative to the massive Arc2Face foundation model (trained on WebFace260M). Eidolon would be a bespoke DiT trained from scratch or fine-tuned. Identity consistency may lag behind Arc2Face-level quality.

Recommendation: This is the immediate next step regardless of what else is pursued. Ship a working DiT with the proven stack, measure identity consistency and slider responsiveness, and iterate. The block-diagonal firewall + decoupled cross-attention pattern is worth validating in a live generative model even if the structured partitions are thinner than originally hoped.

Path B: Replace Monocular Hallucination With 3DMM Parameters (Highest Expected Value)
The literature synthesis already identifies FLAME as the canonical 3D face model. Here is the argument for making FLAME parameters the structured partitions in E:

FLAME identity shape parameters β (typically 100–300 dims) are:

PCA-derived — FLAME's identity space was built via PCA on 4D scans of real humans (Li et al., SIGGRAPH Asia 2017). The β components are orthogonal by construction. This satisfies Eidolon's core principle natively.
Identity-specific by design — unlike Sapiens depth/normals, FLAME β was trained to separate identity from expression and pose. It encodes biological morphology (jaw width, nose projection, brow ridge) extracted from real 3D data.
Monocularly extractable — DECA, MICA, SMIRK, and Pixel3DMM all recover FLAME parameters from a single image. Pixel3DMM (arXiv 2025) uses DINOv2 features + per-pixel normal/UV prediction to achieve >15% improvement in geometric accuracy over baselines.
Direct literature proof that 3DMM parameters work as diffusion conditioning:

The ICCVW 2025 paper "ID-Consistent, Precise Expression Generation with Blendshape-Guided Diffusion" (built on Arc2Face) uses FLAME expression parameters (55-dim: 50 blendshapes + 2 eyelid + 3 jaw pose) projected through an MLP into the CLIP latent space, then injected via IP-Adapter-style decoupled cross-attention. This is exactly Eidolon's architecture — decoupled K/V per modality, summed outputs — but using model-based parameters instead of PCA on monocular maps. If expression blendshapes work as conditioning, identity shape parameters (β) should work equally well.

What Path B would look like concretely:

E = [ z_β | z_ψ | z_θ ]    where:
  z_β  = FLAME identity shape (100–300 dims, PCA-derived, identity-bearing)
  z_ψ  = FLAME expression (50 dims, interpretable blendshapes)
  z_θ  = FLAME pose (6 dims, jaw + neck rotation)Copy
Each partition is already disentangled by the FLAME model structure. The block-diagonal ingestion pattern remains identical to the current spec — three independent MLPs, decoupled cross-attention, expanded tokens per scalar. The only change is the source of the partitions: a fitted 3D morphable model instead of PCA on monocular predictive layers.

Evidence against / caveats:

FLAME fitting from monocular images is imperfect (self-occlusion, lighting ambiguity). But the key difference from Sapiens is that FLAME parameters encode a parametric prior — the model constrains the solution to the space of real human faces. Sapiens depth/normals have no such prior; they produce geometrically plausible but identity-generic output.
The identity shape space may not capture fine detail (scars, wrinkles, micro-asymmetry) that DINO patches capture. That is fine — DINO patches remain the identity carrier; FLAME β provides the interpretable structured control.
Recommendation: Run a quick spike before committing. Use an off-the-shelf FLAME fitter (DECA or SMIRK) on the hegre face-crop corpus, extract β parameters, and run the verification AUC gate. If AUC(β) > 0.6 and AUC([z_g | β]) > AUC(z_g) + 0.01, the partition earns its place. This spike costs days, not weeks.

Path C: Multi-View / Video Geometry (Highest Ceiling, Highest Cost)
If the root problem is that monocular models hallucinate, solve it at the data level: use multiple views to recover real identity-specific geometry.

Approaches:

Video-based: Use the hegre corpus's multi-frame nature. Structure-from-motion on face sequences can recover per-identity 3D point clouds. These are real measurements, not hallucinations.
Multi-view stereo: If the hegre dataset has consistent lighting/camera setups across shoots, multi-view stereo on the same identity across frames can produce dense depth.
NeRF/Gaussian Splatting per identity: For identities with many views, fit a 3D representation and extract canonical geometry.
Evidence: The 3D biometrics survey (ACM 2025) confirms that multi-view approaches solve the identity-specificity problem that monocular methods cannot. The USC MVS-on-consistent-topology work produces identity-specific meshes usable for biometric recognition.

Risk: This is a new data pipeline, not a modeling change. It requires per-identity multi-view capture, which the hegre corpus may or may not support. Engineering cost is high. The output (dense identity-specific depth/normals) would feed back into the existing PCA encoder pipeline, so the downstream architecture is unchanged.

Recommendation: Audit the hegre corpus for multi-view availability per identity before committing. If most identities have ≥3 substantially different views, this path is viable as a medium-term investment. If most identities are single-view per shoot, skip it.

Path D: Train a Custom Geometry Encoder (Highest Risk)
Train a model from scratch to predict identity-discriminative geometric features, supervised by an ArcFace-style loss on the geometric embedding. This would replace both the PCA pipeline and the reliance on off-the-shelf monocular models.

Evidence against: This is essentially the DINO→slider bridge in reverse, and Phase 3 already proved that regression from semantics to geometry destroys identity. Training a custom encoder might avoid the regression problem, but it faces the same fundamental challenge: monocular images do not contain ground-truth identity-specific 3D geometry. Without multi-view or sensor data, the model has no supervision signal.

Recommendation: Do not pursue unless Paths A/B/C are exhausted and a viable supervision source (multi-view geometry, 3D scans) is available.

Concrete Next Steps (Sequenced)
Immediate (This Week): Spike FLAME β as a Structured Partition
Select a monocular FLAME fitter (DECA is well-established; SMIRK is state-of-the-art for expressions; Pixel3DMM has code available and uses DINOv2 which is already in the pipeline
Jun 11, 11:07 PM



↑
to response
Select a monocular FLAME fitter (DECA is well-established; SMIRK is state-of-the-art for expressions; Pixel3DMM has code available and uses DINOv2 which is already in the pipeline). Extract β identity parameters for all 100+ reviewed identities in the hegre face-crop corpus.
Run the canonical verification AUC gate: AUC(β_alone) and AUC([z_g | β]). Pre-register the gate before seeing results (ε = 0.01 per the settled convention).
If PASS: freeze a β PCA encoder (FLAME β already IS PCA-derived, but re-fit on the FFHQ distribution for consistency with the existing pipeline) and integrate into the conditioning stack.
Estimated cost: 2–3 days. Risk: FLAME fitter may struggle with editorial lighting/heavily stylized hegre images. Acceptable for a spike.

Short-Term (Next 2 Weeks): Ship Phase 5 DiT With the Proven Stack
Do not wait for Path B results. Build the DiT now with what works:

Identity stream: Flesh-masked DINOv3 patch tokens (the Phase 4 representation, AUC 0.797), injected via cross-attention. Prefer the unpooled per-patch tokens (~100–1,900 face tokens, median ~1,261) for fine-grained attention; use the pooled 1×1024 vector as the compact fallback.
Control stream: z_g (50 whitened scalars, expanded to 50 learned-embedding tokens), injected via decoupled cross-attention with a per-modality λ scalar.
Architecture: Block-diagonal ingestion (two independent MLPs, not three), decoupled K/V per stream, summed outputs.
Validation gate (pre-register):

Identity consistency: Train on FFHQ, test ID similarity (ArcFace cosine) on hegre held-out identities. Baseline: Arc2Face-level ID-Sim.
Slider responsiveness: Vary individual z_g components ±2σ, measure whether the output image changes on the expected morphological axis and NOT on identity.
If the FLAME β spike passes in parallel, add a third decoupled stream. The architecture is designed for it.

Medium-Term (Next Month): Multi-View Audit
Review the hegre corpus for multi-view availability. If ≥3 substantially different views exist per identity, commission the multi-view geometry pipeline (Path C). This is the only path that can produce identity-specific volumetric data — everything else is parametric. The output would feed back into the PCA encoder pipeline and could revive z_d/z_a as real identity-bearing partitions.

Long-Term: Reconsider the North Star
Phase 1–4's empirical record has revealed a deeper truth: the "fast path" from off-the-shelf monocular models to identity-specific structured geometry does not exist. This is not a failure of Eidolon's architecture — it is a fundamental property of monocular depth estimation that the field is only beginning to document (see the ICLR 2026 paper on VLM hallucination mitigation via depth — even the VLM community now treats monocular depth as a hallucination-prone prior, not a measurement).

The original North Star — a vector E = [z_g | z_d | z_a] encoding a person through PCA-derived partitions from monocular predictive layers — was the right question but assumed a data source that does not produce identity-specific signal. The corrected vision should be:

Eidolon v2: A vector E = [z_β | z_g] where z_β is FLAME identity shape (parametric, PCA-derived, biologically grounded) and z_g is pose-invariant keypoint geometry (non-parametric, already shipped). Identity conditioning comes from DINO patches externally. This preserves the core architectural principles — orthogonality guarantees, block-diagonal firewalls, decoupled cross-attention, interpretable sliders — while replacing the dead monocular path with a model-based path that has 30 years of empirical validation behind it.
